>> Woodruff: LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS SAY THE SURVIVING
SUSPECT IN THE BOSTON BOMBINGS
HAS ADMITTED HE DID PLAY A ROLE
IN THE ATTACKS, AND THEY BELIEVE
HE AND HIS BROTHER ACTED ALONE.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE GET
THE LATEST ON THE INVESTIGATION,
AND THE CONDITION OF DZHOKAR
TSARNAEV, UPGRADED TODAY TO
FAIR.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, JEFFREY BROWN
EXAMINES THEESSO LNS LEARNED FOR
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIALS ABOUT
SECURITY AT BIG EVENTS AND
GATHERINGS.
>> Ifill: THEN, A POWERFUL
DEMOCRAT, MONTANA'S MAX BAUCUS,
IS THE EIGHTH SENATOR TO SAY HE
WON'T SEEK REELECTION NEXT YEAR.
WE LOOK AT WHY DEMOCRATS ARE
WORRIED.
>> Woodruff: FRED DE SAM LAZARO
REPORTS ON GENDER BIAS IN INDIA,
WHERE MANY PARENTS STILL OPT FOR
BABY BOYS OVER GIRLS.
>> THE GAP BEGAN TO WIDEEN IN
THE '90s WITH NEW ULTRASOUND
MACHINES THAT MADE IT EASY TO
LEARN A FETUS'S SEX.
THIS SCANS HAVE LED TO THE
TERMINATION OF MILLIONS OF
FEMALE PREGNANCIES.
>> Ifill: AND MARGARET WARNER
TALKS WITH THE AUTHOR OF A NEW
BOOK ABOUT SHADOW WARFARE WAGED
BY THE C.I.A. AND SPECIAL
FORCES.
>> A WEEK AFTER 9/11 PRESIDENT
BUSH GAVE THE C.I.A. LETHAL
AUTHORITY TOAPTU CRE AND KILL AL
QAEDA MEMBERS SO THEY BECOME
MUCH MORE INTO THE KILLING
BUSINESS AND THE MILITARY.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: NEW DETAILS EMERGED
TODAY IN THE INVESTIGATION OF
TWO CHECHEN-AMERICAN BROTHERS IN
THE BOSTON BOMBINGS.
AND AS AUTHORITIES WORKED TO
BUILD THEIR CASE, TWO MORE
VICTIMS OF THE CITY'S WEEK OF
TERROR WERE LAID TO REST.
FAMILY D FANRIENDS PAID FINAL
RESPECTS TODAY AS FUNERALS FOR
M.I.T. POLICE OFFICER SEAN
COLLIER AND EIGHT-YEAR-OLD
MARTIN RICHARD.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE MEDICAL
CONDITION OF THE SURVIVING
USPESCT-- 19-YEAR-OLD DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV-- WAS UPGRADED TO FAIR
FROM SERIOUS.
HE'S NOW FACING FEDERAL CHARGES
THAT HE AND HIS OLDER BROTHER
TAMERLAN PLANTED PRESSURE COOKER
BOMBS NEAR THE FINISH LINE FOR
THE BOSTON MARATHON.
TAMERLAN LATER DIED AFTER A
SHOOTOUT WITH POLICE.
IN PROVIDENCE, RHODE ISLAND,
LAWYERS FOR TAMERLAN TSARNAEV'S
WIFE CATHERINE SAID SHE HAD BEEN
UNAWARE OF THE BOMBING PLOT.
>> THE REPORTS OF INVOLVEMENT BY
HER HUSBAND AND BROTHER-IN-LAW
CAME AS AN ABSOLUTE SHOCK TO
THEM ALL.
AS A MOTHER, A SISTER, A
DAUGHTER, A WIFE, KATIE DEEPLY
MOURNS THE PAIN AND LOSS TO
INNOCENT VICTIMS, STUDENTS, LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS, FAMILIES
AND OUR COMMUNITY.
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THIS TRAGEDY
SHE, HER DAUGHTER AND HER FAMILY
ARE TRYING TO COME TO TERMS WITH
THIS EVENT.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, BOTH THE
"WASHINGTON POST" AND THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" HAVE REPORTED THAT
THE YOUNGER TSARNAEV ADMITTED
HIS ROLE IN THE ATTACK.
THE "POST" ALSO REPORTED HE TOLD
INVESTIGATORS THAT U.S.
INVOLVEMENT IN THE IRAQ AND
AFGHANISTAN WARS WERE MOTIVATING
FACTORS.
OTHER ACCOUNTS SAID THERE
APPEARED TO BE NO LINKS TO
LARGER TERRORIST GROUPS.
IN RUSSIA TODAY, THEIR MOTHER
SAID F.B.I. AGENTS TALKED TO HER
ABOUT TAMERLAN TSARNAEV'S TRIP
BACK HOME LAST YEAR, BUT SHE
TOLD THEM HE WAS NO RADICAL.
>> WHAT HAPPENED IS A TERRIBLE
THING.
BUT I KNOW THAT MY KIDS HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH IT.
I KNOW IT.
I'M A MOTHER.
I HAVE -- YOU KNOW, I KNOW MY
KIDS.
I KNOW MY KIDS.
I REALLY -- MY KIDS WOULD NEVER
GET INVOLVED IN ANYTHING LIKE
THAT.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN BOSTON,
THERE WERE MIXED FEELINGS TODAY
AMONG PEOPLE RETURNING TO HOMES
AND BUSINESSES ALONG REOPENED
SECTIONS OF BOYLSTON STREET, THE
SITE OF THE BOMBINGS.
>> I DON'T WANT TO GET IN
ANYONE'S WAY, YOU KNOW?
IT'S PRETTY WEIRD BEING BACK
HERE.
I DON'T REALLY KNOW WHAT TO DO.
>> IT'S FANTASTIC, YEAH.
IT FEELS LIKE HOME.
WE'RE READY FOR IT TO BE BUSY
AGAIN.
>> Reporter: GET BACK TO NORMAL?
>> EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME TIME,
THE BOSTON PUBLIC HEALTH
COMMISSION UPPED THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE INJURED IN THE MARATHON
BOMBING FROM 180 TO 264.
THE NEW TOTAL TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
INDIVIDUALS WHO DELAYED
TREATMENT FOR MINOR INJURIES.
51 OF THE VICTIMS REMAIN
HOSPITALIZED.
THIS AMP, BOSTON MAYOR TOM
MENINO ANNOUNCED THE BIGGEST
CHARITABLE FUND FOR THE BOMBING
VICTIMS, THE ONE FUND, IS UP TO
$20 MILLION SO FAR.
CORPORATE DONORS COMMITTED $15
MILLION, THE REST CAME FROM SOME
50,000 INDIVIDUALS.
PAYMENTS ARE EXPECTED TO BE
DISTRIBUTED STARTING IN JULY.
WE HAVE MORE NOW ON SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS SURROUNDING THE
INVESTIGATION AND WHAT'S BEEN
LEARNED IN THE LAST 24 HOURS.
I SPOKE WITH DEVLIN BARRETT OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL" A
SHORT TIME AGO.
DEVLIN BARRETT, WELCOME.
LET ME ASK YOU FIRST ABOUT THIS
YOUNGER BROTHER DZHOKHAR.
WE KNOW THAT HE'S IN THE
HOSPITAL BED COMMUNICATING.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT HIS
INJURIES AND HOW HE'S
COMMUNICATING WITH
INVESTIGATORS.
>> HIS MEDICAL CONDITION IS
UPGRADED FROM SERIOUS TO FAIR,
WHICH MEANS THAT HE IS IMPROVING
BUT HE STILL HAS SOME PRETTY
MAJOR INJURIES WHICH ARE
AFFECTING HIS ABILITY TO
COMMUNICATE.
SPECIFICALLY HE'S BEEN SHOT IN
THE HEAD, SOME SORT OF HEAD
WOUND, ALSO A PRETTY SERIOUS
GUNSHOT WOUND TO THE NECK WHICH
IS AFFECTING HIS THROAT AND ALSO
HE'S GOT GUNSHOT WOUNDS TO HIS
LEG AND HIS HAND.
SO OUR UNDERSTANDING OF IT IS HE
CAN BASICALLY COMMUNICATE BY
WRITING A LITTLE AND BY NODDING
AND A LITTLE BIT OF SORT OF
GRUNTING YES OR NO AT TIMES BUT
IT'S VERY LIMITED IS WHAT'S BEEN
DESCRIBED TO US.
>> Woodruff: WHAT HAVE YOU
LEARNED ABOUT WHAT HE'S SAYING
TO THEM?
WHAT HE'S COMMUNICATING.
>> WE'RE TOLD HE'S TELL HIS
F.B.I. QUESTIONERS THAT HE AND
HIS BROTHER ACTING ALONE.
THAT THEY DID SO OUT OF A
JIHADIST SENTIMENT, AN
ANTI-AMERICAN SENTIMENT, BUT
THAT THEY WEREN'T DIRECTED BY
ANYONE, CERTAINLY NOT A TERROR
GROUP OVERSEAS.
AND HE'S ALSO TOLD THEM THAT
THERE AREN'T ANY OTHER BOMBS AND
THERE AREN'T ANY OTHER BOMBERS
OUT THERE THAT THEY HAVE TO
WORRY ABOUT.
NOW, WHAT I'M TOLD IS
INVESTIGATORS AREN'T TAKING ANY
OF THAT AT FACE VALUE, BUT SO
FAR THEY HAVE NOT FOUND OTHER
EVIDENCE TO PROVE THOSE
ASSERTIONS WRONG.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT'S YOUR
UNDERSTANDING OF WHETHER HE HAS
TAKEN RESPONSIBILITY FOR WHAT'S
HAPPENED?
>> WHAT WE'VE BEEN TOLD IS THAT
HE ESSENTIALLY ACKNOWLEDGES HIS
ROLE IN THIS.
THERE ARE DIFFERING ACCOUNTS OF
HOW MUCH OF THE DIRECTION HE
CITES TO HIS BROTHER, I THINK
THAT'S FAILED TO BE DETERMINED,
BUT HE ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE
ESSENTIALLY DID THIS AND WAS
PART OF THIS.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S WHAT I
WANT TO TALK TO YOU ABOUT
BECAUSE THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS
THAT HE IS SAYING IN SO MANY
WORDS AND COMMUNICATING TO
INVESTIGATORS THAT THIS WAS
MAINLY HIS BROTHER'S IDEA.
THAT HIS OLDER BROTHER WAS THE
DRIVING FORCE HERE.
>> I'VE SEEN THOSE REPORTS AND
I'LL BE HONEST, THAT'S NOT HOW
IT'S BEEN DESCRIBED TO ME.
I THINK WE ALSO HAVE TO BE
CAREFUL IN WHEN YOU'LL HEAR
DIFFERENT THINGS.
THAT'S GOING TO BE A BIG PART OF
THE LEGAL FIGHT OVER THIS GUY'S
ULTIMATE SENTENCE.
HE'S FACING THE DEATH PENALTY.
ONE OF THE -- MAYBE THE ONLY
MITIGATING FACTOR FOR HIM IN ALL
THIS MAY BE THAT IF HE'S ABLE TO
CLAIM THAT HE WAS ESSENTIALLY A
PAWN OR A TOOL OF HIS OLDER
BROTHER.
I THINK, FRANKLY, WHATEVER THE
TRUTH IS, IT'S GOING TO TAKE
MORE THAN HIS WORD TO DETERMINE
IT.
>> Woodruff: BUT IN SO MANY
WORDS HE'S SAYING THEY WERE NOT
IN CONNECTION WITH OUTSIDE GROUP
BUS THEY WERE THAT THEY WERE
LOOKING AT JIHADIST WEB SITES?
>> RIGHT.
THIS SEEMS TO BE -- EVERYTHING
HE'S TELLING THEM AND EVERYTHING
THE F.B.I. HAS FOUND SO FAR
SUGGESTS THE CLASSIC NIGHTMARE
SCENARIO FOR COUNTERTERRORISM
OFFICIALS WHICH IS
SELF-MOTIVATED, SELF-INDOCTRINE
NATED AND SELF-TRAINED
ESSENTIALLY.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THEY
WON'T FIND SOMETHING IN THE
COURSE OF THE INVESTIGATION THAT
POINTS TO SOME DIRECTION OR
TRAINING OR IDEOLOGICAL
INVOLVEMENT BY ANOTHER PARTY,
BUT RIGHT NOW WHAT THEY HAVE IS
TWO YOUNG MEN WHO SEEM TO HAVE
TAKEN IT UPON THEMSELVES TO
CONDUCT SOME PRETTY ATROCIOUS
ACTS OF VIOLENCE.
>> Woodruff: DEVLIN, IT'S BEEN
REPORTED THAT INVESTIGATORS ARE
TALKING TO THE WIDOW OF THE
OLDER BROTHER TAMERLAN.
WHAT'S KNOWN ABOUT WHAT SHE'S
SAYING?
>> THAT'S A VERY INTERESTING
PIECE TO THIS CASE BECAUSE ONE
OF THE THINGS INVESTIGATORS ARE
TRYING TO DETERMINE IS DID
ANYONE EITHER WITTINGLY OR
UNWITTINGLY HELP THEM ACCOMPLISH
THIS?
AND THE WIDOW HAS BEEN AN
INTERESTING FOCUS FOR THE BUREAU
FOR A NUMBER OF DAYS BECAUSE SHE
IMMEDIATELY GOT A LAWYER AND THE
LAWYER HAS BEEN NEGOTIATING
TERMS FOR HER TO COME IN AND
TALK AND I BELIEVE THAT
CONVERSATION BEGAN TODAY AND I
THINK THAT'S SOMEONE THAT THE
F.B.I. HAS BEEN VERY INTERESTED
IN TALKING TO AND REALLY WANTS
TO UNDERSTAND BETTER WHAT THAT
RELATIONSHIP WAS, WHAT SHE SAW
OR DIDN'T SEE, AND
WHAT-THE-SHAUGT OR DIDN'T THINK
ONCE THE ATTACKS HAPPENED.
>> Pelley: AND WE KNOW THAT HER
ATTORNEY IS SAYING SHE DIDN'T
KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT IT.
DO YOU KNOW WHO ELSE THEY ARE
TALKING TO?
>> WELL, THEY'RE TALKING TO
BASICALLY EVERY SINGLE PERSON
WHO EVER HAD CONTACT WITH THEM.
I KNOW ANOTHER PIECE OF THIS
THAT THEY'RE LOOKING AT IS THE
OLDER BROTHER, THERE ARE RECORDS
SHOWING THAT THE OLDER BROTHER
PURCHASED SOME FAIRLY LARGE
PIECES OF FIREWORKS IN NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
WE'VE BEEN TOLD BY EXPERTS THAT,
IN THEORY, YOU COULD TAKE OUT
THE BLACK POWDER FROM THOSE
FIREWORKS AND, IF YOU HAD A
WHOLE BUNCH OF THEM-- CERTAINLY
MORE THAN THERE ARE RECORDS FOR
THE BROTHER PURCHASING-- BUT IF
YOU HAD A BUNCH OF OTHER
PURCHASES YOU COULD AMASS ENOUGH
BLACK POWDER, TECHNICALLY, TO
BUILD THESE TYPES OF BOMBS.
IT'S JUST AN AVENUE THE F.B.I.
IS PURSUING AT THIS POINT.
THEY THINK IT'S POSSIBLE THAT
THAT'S WHERE THE BLACK POWDER
FOR THESE BOMBS CAME FROM BUT
THEY ALSO HAVEN'T RULED OUT
OTHER POTENTIAL SOURCES FOR THE
BLACK POWDER SUCH AS GUN POWDER
OR OTHER THINGS.
>> Woodruff: DEVLIN BARRETT WITH
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL," WE
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: COMING UP, MORE ON THE
BOSTON STORY, INCLUDING A LOOK
AT WHAT IT TAKES TO SECURE
PUBLIC SPACES.
PLUS, ANOTHER SENATOR ANNOUNCES
PLANS TO RETIRE; THE GAP BETWEEN
THE NUMBER OF BOY AND GIRL
BABIES IN INDIA; AND THE BLURRED
LINES BETWEEN SPIES AND
SOLDIERS.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY, HERE'S HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: A MISSIPI
MAN ACCUSED OF SENDING RICIN-
TAINTED LETTERS TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND A SENATOR WAS RELEASED
ON BOND TODAY.L KEVIN CURTIS WEA
DAY AFTER AN F.B.I. AGENT
TESTIFIED THAT AUTHORITIES FOUND
NO INCRIMINATING EVIDENCE AT HIS
HOME.
>> THE LAST SEVEN DAYS STARING
AT FOUR GRAY WALLS LIKE "GREEN,
GREEN GRASS OF HOME" NOT REALLY
KNOWING WHAT'S HAPPENING AND NOT
HAVING A CLUE WHY I'M THERE,
JUST BEING IN A STATE OF
OVERWHELMD IS THE BEST WAY I CAN
DESCRIBE IT.
WHEN YOU'VE BEEN CHARGED WITH
SOMETHING AND YOU JUST -- YOU
NEVER HEARD OF RICIN OR
WHATEVER.
I THOUGHT THEY SAID RICE AND I
SAID "I DON'T EVEN EAT RICE."
>> Sreenivasan: MEANWHILE,
FEDERAL AGENTS SEARCHED THE HOME
OF A SECOND MISSISSIPPI MAN
TODAY.
AND ANOTHER PACKAGE, POSSIBLY
CONTAINING RICIN, WAS FOUND AT A
MILITARY MAIL FACILITY IN
WASHINGTON.
THE TWO SUSPECTS ACCUSED OF
PLOTTING TO DERAIL A PASSENGER
TRAIN IN CANADA HAD THEIR
INITIAL COURT APPEARANCES TODAY.
BOTH MEN DENIED THE ALLEGATIONS,
AND ONE SAID HE HAS BEEN
UNFAIRLY ACCUSED.
CANADIAN INVESTIGATORS SAY THE
PAIR RECEIVED "DIRECTION AND
GUIDANCE" FROM AL-QAEDA ELEMENTS
IN IRAN.
BUT A SPOKESMAN FOR IRAN'S
FOREIGN MINISTRY REJECTED THE
CLAIM.
>> ( translated ): NO FIRM
EVIDENCE HAS BEEN RELEASED
REGARDING THE INDIVIDUALS WHO
ARE CLAIMED TO HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED IN CANADA.
VIEWS OF EXTREMIST GROUPS--
ESPECIALLY AL QAEDA-- HAVE NO
COMPATIBILITY WITH IRAN EITHER
POLITICALLY OR IDEOLOGICALLY.
WE OPPOSE ANY TERRORIST AND
VIOLENT ACTION THAT WOULD
JEOPARDIZE THE LIVES OF INNOCENT
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TWO SUSPECTS
ARE NOT CANADIAN CITIZENS, BUT
AUTHORITIES HAVE NOTAMED N THEIR
HOME COUNTRIES.
THEY HAVE BEEN UNDER
SURVEILLANCE SINCE LAST FALL,
WHEN MEMBERS OF TORONTO'S MUSLIM
COMMUNITY TIPPED OFF POLICE.
THE U.S. SECRETARY OF HOMELAND
SECURITY ARGUED TODAY THAT
IMMIGRATION REFORM WOULD HELP
PREVENT TERRORISM.
OPPONENTS OF THE BILL ARE TRYING
TO SLOW ITS PROGRESS IN THE WAKE
OF THE BOSTON BOMBINGS.
BUT AT A SENATE HEARING, JANET
NAPOLITANO SAID PEOPLE HERE
ILLEGALLY MIGHT COME FORWARD FOR
A CHANCE AT CITIZENSHIP, MAKING
IMMIGRATION CONTROL MORE
EFFECTIVE.
>> THE EXISTING BILL BUILDS ON
THAT AND ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
THINGS, THE EXISTING BILL DOES,
QUITE FRANKLY FROM A LAW
ENFORCEMENT PERSPECTIVE IS
BRINGING ALL OF THE PEOPLE OUT
OF THE SHADOWS WHO ARE CURRENTLY
IN THE SHADOWS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BROTHERS WHO
ALLEGEDLY CARRIED OUT THE BOSTON
BOMBINGS CAME TO THE U.S. FROM
CHECHNYA ABOUT TEN YEARS AGO AND
RECEIVED ASYLUM.
THE MURDER TRIAL OF AN ABORTION
PROVIDER IN PHILADELPHIA TOOK A
SUDDEN TURN TODAY.
A STATE COURT JUDGE DISMISSED
CHARGES THAT DR. KERMIT GOSNELL
MURDERED THREE BABIES DURING
LATE-TERM ABORTIONS.
PROSECUTORS ALLEGED THAT HE
KILLED THEM AFTER THEY WERE BORN
ALIVE.
GOSNELL STILL FACES CHARGES HE
MURDERED FOUR OTHER BABIES, AS
WELL AS A PATIENT WHO DIED AFTER
AN ABORTION.
IN IRAQ, AT LEAST 56 PEOPLE DIED
AFTER GOVERNMENT FORCES RAIDED A
SUNNI PROTEST CAMP BEFORE DAWN.
THE RAID SPARKED FIERCE FIGHTING
IN HAWIJA, ABOUT 160 MILES NORTH
OF BAGHDAD.
LATER, MILITANTS STORMED A
NEARBY ARMYOST, P WHERE SIX
OTHER PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
NEWS OF THE VIOLENCE ALSO LED TO
CLASHES ELSEWHERE BETWEEN SUNNI
DEMONSTRATORS AND POLICE.
THERE WERE NEW ACCUSATIONS FROM
ISRAEL TODAY THAT SYRIA IS USING
CHEMICAL WEAPONS AGAINST REBELS.
IN TEL AVIV, A SENIOR MILITARY
OFFICIAL SAID VISUAL EVIDENCE
SHOWS THAT GOVERNMENT FORCES HAS
ENGAGED IN CHEMICAL ATTACKS MORE
THAN ONCE.
THE LATEST WAS LAST MONTH, NEAR
DAMASCUS.
>> ( translated ): TO THE BEST
OF OUR PROFESSIONAL
UNDERSTANDING, THE REGIME USED
LETHAL CHEMICAL WEAPONS AGAINST
MILITANTS ON A NUMBER OF
OCCASIONS IN THE PAST FEW MONTHS
INCLUDING THE MOST REPORTED
INCIDENT ON MARCH 19.
THE PEOPLE HAVING FOAM COMING
OUT OF THEIR MOUTHS AND THAT
SHOWS IN OUR EYES THEY MADE USE
OF LETHAL CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
WHICH CHEMICAL WEAPONS?
PROBABLY SARIN.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITAIN AND
FRANCE ANNOUNCED IN MARCH THEY
HAD EVIDENCE ASSAD WAS USING
CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS SAID ANY
SUCH ACTION WOULD BE A "GAME
CHANGER."
BUT A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN SAID
TODAY THE U.S. STILL WANTS TO
SEE CONCLUSIVE EVIDENCE.
FRANCE HAS BECOME THE LATEST
COUNTRY TO LEGALIZE SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
THE LEGISLATION EASILY PASSED
TODAY, AFTER A DISRUPTION ON THE
FLOOR OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY.
THE ASSEMBLY PRESIDENT HAD A
PROTESTER EJECTED, AND THE VOTE
WENT AHEAD.
THIS CAME AFTER WEEKS OF
DEMONSTRATIONS AGAINST THE
PROPOSAL AND AN INCREASE IN HATE
CRIMES AGAINST GAYS.
FRANCE HAS HAD CIVIL UNIONS
SINCE 1999.
THE WEALTH GAP IN AMERICA HAS
WIDENED EVEN MORE.
A PEW RESEARCH CENTER REPORT
FINDS THE WEALTHIEST 7% OF
AMERICANS GREW EVEN RICHER
DURING THE FIRST TWO YEARS OF
THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE AVERAGE
NET WORTH FOR THE REMAINING 93%
WAS DOWN.
PART OF THE EXPLANATION IS THAT
THE WEALTHY HOLD MORE STOCKS
THAT INCREASED IN VALUE.
THE FINDINGS WERE BASED ON U.S.
CENSUS DATA.
WALL STREET BRIEFLY PLUNGED
TODAY AFTER A FAKE "TWEET" SAID
THERE HAD BEEN EXPLOSIONS AT THE
WHITE HOUSE, AND THE PRESIDENT
HAD BEEN WOUNDED.
IT TURNED OUT SOMEONE HAD HACKED
TWITTER ACCOUNTS OF THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS, AND POSTED THE
BOGUS MESSAGE.
THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION PLANNED TO LOOK INTO
THE INCIDENT.
STOCKS QUICKLY RECOVERED, AND
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 152 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
14,719.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 35
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 3269.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: AND WE COME BACK TO
THE BOSTON STORY.
LAST WEEK'S BOMBINGS SPARKED NEW
INTEREST IN BEEFING UP SECURITY
AT LARGE PUBLIC GATHERINGS FROM
STREET FAIRS TO SPORTS
COMPETITIONS.
JEFFREY BROWN LOOKS INTO THAT.
>> Brown: THE QUESTION AFTER THE
EVENTS OF LAST WEEK: HOW SAFE
CAN WE EVER BE?
ESPECIALLY IN MAJOR CITIES.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE GATHERED IN
PUBLIC BUILDINGS OR FOR BIG
EVENTS.
IT'S A QUESTION THAT WAS POSED
AFTER THE 1995 OKLAHOMA CITY
BOMBING THAT KILLED 168.
AND A YEAR LATER, AFTER A PIPE
BOMB EXPLODED IN ATLANTA'S
CENTENNIAL OLYMPIC PARK DURING
THE SUMMER GAMES, KILLING ONE
AND INJURING 111.
9/11, OF COURSE, BRGHTOU A
RATCHETING UP OF SECURITY
MEASURES INCLUDING AMONG MUCH
ELSE, THE CREATION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
AND THE T.S.A. AND SURVEILLANCE
CAMERAS WATCHING FOR SUSPICIOUS
ACTIVITIES.
AND THERE HAVE BEEN EXAMPLES OF
THWARTED ATTACKS ON PUBLIC
SPACES, NOTABLY IN 2010.
THE CAR BOMB IN NEW YORK CITY'S
TIME SQUARE WAS DISABLED AFTER
TWO STREET VENDORS REPORTED THE
SMONG KIVEHICLE TO POLICE.
SINCE 2003, HOMELAND SECURITY'S
URBAN AREA SECURITY INITIATIVE
GRANTS HAVE FUNNELED BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS TO MAJOR CITIES FOR
ANTI-TERRORISM TRAINING AND
EQUIPMENT.
SECURITY EXPERTS WILL NOW STUDY
BOSTON FOR LESSONS LEARNED FOR
FUTURE PUBLIC GATHERINGS.
JUST
JUST ONE SMALL EXAMPLE: NATIONAL
FOOTBALL LEAGUE OFFICIALS SAID
TODAY THAT THEY'RE INCREASING
SECURITY FOR THIS WEEK'S PLAYER
DRAFT, TO BE HELD AT NEW YORK'S
RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL.
AND WE LOOK AT THESE ISSUES NOW
WITH JIM DAVIS, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE COLORADO
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
HE'S ALSO CHAIR OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNOR'S ASSOCIATION HOMELAND
SECURITY ADVISORS COUNCIL.
AMONG BIG EVENTS HE'S WORKED ON
WAS THE 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
CONVENTION IN DENVER.
AND ED CANNON, CURRENTLY OF T&M
PROTECTION RESOURCES, A PRIVATE
SECURITY CONSULTING FIRM.
HE WAS FORMERLY AN ASSISTANT
CHIEF OF THE NEW YORK CITY
POLICE DEPARTMENT, AND HELPED
SET UP SECURITY FOR THAT CITY'S
MARATHON AND MANY OTHER EVENTS.
WELL, JIM DAVIS, STARTING WITH
YOU, HOW DOES BOSTON CHANGE
THINGS FOR PEOPLE IN YOUR
POSITION?
WHAT KINDS OF DISCUSSIONS ARE
GOING ON NOW?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY WE'RE MUCH
MORE FOCUSED ON SECURITY.
YOU KNOW, IN THE UNITED STATES
WE'VE GOT PRETTY SHORT MEMORIES
AND I THINK AFTER 9/11 WE WERE
VERY FOCUSED ON SECURITY AND
THEN THINGS KIND OF WE'D GO
THROUGH A TIME PERIOD WHERE WE
DON'T A LOT OF ATTACKS OR ANY
SUCCESSFUL ATTACKS AND NOW
BOSTON HAPPENS AND PEOPLE GET
FOCUSED ON IT AGAIN.
I THINK THAT IN THE -- IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY WE'VE ALWAYS BEEN
FOCUSED ON IT BUT PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO BE MORE RECEPTIVE TO
SECURITY MEASURES NOW AND MORE
FOCUSED ON MAKING SURE THAT
MAJOR EVENTS ARE SAFER.
>> Brown: ED CANNON, EXPLAIN HOW
THIS WORKS.
TAKE SOMETHING YOU HAVE WORKED
ON, PERHAPS THE NEW YORK CITY
MARATHON, FOR EXAMPLE.
WHAT KIND OF MEASURES GO INTO
IT?
HOW MUCH PREPARATION?
HOW MUCH THINKING AND HOW MIGHT
THAT CHANGE IF AT ALL NOW?
>> WELL, JEFF, THE NEW YORK CITY
MARATHON IS GOING TO BE EXAMINED
WITH LESSONS LEARNED FROM WHAT
OCCURRED LAST WEEK IN BOSTON.
THINK ABOUT IT, 26.2 MILES OF A
ROUTE IS A VERY DIFFICULT AREA
TO EFFECTIVELY SECURE AND
POLICE.
SO WHAT WE NEED TO RECOGNIZE IS
WHAT A TERRORIST MIND-SET IS,
WHAT DO THEY CONSIDER TO BE A
HIGH-VALUE TARGET AND THEIR
GOALS ARE TO STRIKE AT SOMETHING
THAT'S ICONIC, SUCH AS THE WORLD
TRADE CENTER, SUCH AS THE MURRAH
BUILDING, SUCH AS THE BOSTON
MARATHON.
AND THEY ALSO WANT TO INFLICT AS
MANY CASUALTIES AS THEY POSSIBLY
CAN AND, LASTLY, THEY'RE LOOKING
TO HAVE AN ECONOMIC IMPACT AS
WELL.
SO WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT A
MARATHON AND THINKING OF WHAT
HAVE A TERRORIST'S GOALS ARE, WE
WOULD FOCUS PRIMARILY BECAUSE WE
HAVE FINITE SECURITY RESOURCES,
WE WOULD FOCUS ON THOSE AREAS
THAT ARE MOST CROWDED.
SPECIFICALLY THE STARTING LINE
AND THE FINISH LINE.
AND I THINK WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
SEE IS AS WE'VE SEEN AT VENUES
POST-9/11 WHERE THERE'S GOING TO
BE ADDITIONAL SCREENING ADOWN
WHAT WE SEE AT TIMES SQUARE AWE
NEW YEAR'S EVE WITH FOLKS BEFORE
THEY GET INTO TIMES SQUARE
NEEDED TO BE SCREENED BY
OFFICERS AND AS IN BALLPARKS
PREVENTED FROM CARRYING IN
BACKPACKS, BRIEFCASES, OTHER
LARGE PACKAGES.
WE'RE GOING TO RELY HEAVILY ON
THE COMMITMENT OF THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION TO GO ALONG THE LINES
OF IF YOU SEE SOMETHING, SAY
SOMETHING AND B
SORT OF LIKE THEY DO IN ISRAEL
WHICH HAS BEEN LIVING FOR
DECADES IN THIS TYPE OF THREAT.
IF YOU LEAVE AN UNATTENDED
PACKAGE IN AN AIRPORT OR BUS OR
TRAIN STATION IN ISRAEL, IT
WON'T BE LONG BEFORE A CIVILIAN
WILL ANNOUNCE IT TO THE OTHERS
AROUND THEM AND TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT THAT THERE IS THAT
UNATTENDED PACKAGE.
SO THERE'S GOING TO BE A
COMBINATION.
>> Pelley: JIM DAVIS, ONE
OBVIOUS QUESTION IS CAN WE EVER
GUARANTEE PROTECTION?
CAN WE EVER GUARANTEE THAT
SOMETHING LIKE THIS DOESN'T
HAPPEN GIVEN ALL OF THE KINDS OF
THINGS WE JUST HEARD ABOUT?
>> I THINK WE ABSOLUTELY CANNOT
GUARANTEE IT.
SO -- BUT, YOU KNOW, THE
CHALLENGE IS TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE EVENT IS AS SECURE AS
POSSIBLE WHILE ALSO ALLOWING FOR
PEOPLE TO ENJOY THE EVENT.
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE EXPECT TO BE
ABLE TO PARTICIPATE IN A
MARATHON.
OR THEY EXPECT TO BE ABLE TO GO
TO A FOOTBALL GAME AND ENJOY
THAT EVENT AND STILL HAVE A
FEELING OF SECURITY.
SO IT REALLY IS A CHALLENGE FOR
LAW ENFORCEMENT TO MAKE SURE
THAT YOU'RE DOING WHAT YOU CAN
TO SECURE THE EVENT WHILE ALSO
ALLOWING PEOPLE THE FREEDOM TO
REALLY ENJOY IT.
>> Brown:S WHERE THAT LINE?
BECAUSE IT'S ENJOYMENT, IT'S
CONVENIENCE, THERE ARE OBVIOUS
CIVIL LIBERTIES ISSUES THAT CAN
COME UP.
WHERE DO YOU DRAW THE LINE?
>> WELL, IT'S A CONTINUUM AND A
LOT OF IT HAS TO DO WITH WHAT
PEOPLE EXPECT SO, FOR EXAMPLE,
NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE, THEY
LOOK AT ALL THE BAGS THAT ALL
THE SPECTATORS BRING IN BAGS,
SECURITY WILL LOOK THROUGH YOUR
BAGS, THEY'LL PAT PEOPLE DOWN AS
THEY COME INTO THE VENUE.
AND THAT IS WHAT PEOPLE EXPECT
NOW FROM THE N.F.L.
IT'S -- YOU KNOW, IF YOU WANT TO
GET INTO THE GAME YOU'VE GOT TO
FOLLOW THOSE PROCEDURES.
SO I THINK THAT IT HAS A LOT TO
DO WITH PEOPLE'S EXPECTATIONS.
CERTAINLY AFTER SOMETHING LIKE
BOSTON I THINK PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO BE MORE WILLING TO HAVE
SECURITY MEASURES, MORE
STRENUOUS, MORE INVASIVE
SECURITY MEASURES.
BUT, AGAIN, YOU KNOW, THIS IS
THE UNITED STATES AND WE'VE GOT
TO PROTECT PEOPLE'S FREEDOMS.
AND THEIR CIVIL LIBERTIES.
>> Brown: GO AHEAD.
>> IF I COULD FOLLOW UP ON JIM'S
POINT, WHICH IS AN EXCELLENT
POINT THAT THERE NEEDS TO BE A
BALANCE BETWEEN SECURITY AND
PEOPLE'S RIGHT TO ENJOY THEIR
EVERYDAY LIVES TO DO BUSINESS,
TO GO TO SCHOOL, TO ENJOY THE
FREEDOMS THAT THIS COUNTRY HAS
TO OFFER THE ENTIRE WORLD, BUT I
THINK WHAT WE'RE FACING NOW IS A
NEW TYPE OF THREAT.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS PUT IN PLACE
A RADAR, IF YOU WILL, THAT WILL
IDENTIFY LARGE SCALE ATTACKS
SUCH AS THE MURRAH ATTACK OR THE
WORLD TRADE CENTER ATTACKS WHEN
THEY'RE IN THE PLANNINGTOR VERY
EARLY OPERATIONAL STAGES.
SO NOW THE THREAT WE'RE FACED
WITH IS MORE OF A LONE WOLF OR
SMALL STYLE SUCH AS THE BROTHERS
IN BOSTON WHO ARE INVOLVED IN
LOW TECH, LOW COST BUT HIGH
CONSEQUENCE ATTACKS SO WE DO
HAVE TO BECOME MORE INVOLVED IN
SOME OF THESE MORE THOROUGH
SCREENINGS BEFORE WE COME INTO
VENUES.
ALSO THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY.
CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION
SYSTEMS CAN BE ADJUSTED SO AS TO
RECOGNIZE -- TO BE ABLE TO
RECOGNIZE THINGS THAT ARE
UNUSUAL SO IF THERE'S A ISOLATED
LOCATION AND SOMEONE ENTERS THAT
LOCATION THE CAMERAS CAN BE
TRAINED OR PROGRAMMED, I SHOULD
SAY, WITH RULES THAT WILL
RECOGNIZE THAT AND SEND AN
ALERT.
IF A BAG IS DROPPED AND LEFT IN
A LOCATION FOR A PARTICULAR
AMOUNT OF TIME, THE VIDEO
ANALYTICS WILL RECOGNIZE THAT
AND SEND AN ALERT.
AND TO YOUR QUESTION AS TO WHEN
DOES IT BECOME TOO MUCH, THIS
TYPE OF SURVEILLANCE, THESE
TYPES OF SCREENINGS, THINGS LIKE
THAT THE COURTS WILL LET US
KNOW.
THE COURTS HAVE ALWAYS LET
POLICE, LET LAW ENFORCENT
AGENCYS IF THEY'VE GONE TOO FAR
AND CROSSED THE LINE.
>> Pelley:.
>> Brown: OKAY, ED CANNON, JIM
DAVIS, THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: FIND OUT HOW MUCH
MONEY DIFFERENT METROPOLITAN
AREAS-- INCLUDING BOSTON-- HAVE
RECEIVED FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY.
THERE'S A GRAPHIC ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
>> Ifill: NOW, NEW DEVELOPMENTS
IN THE UPCOMING BATTLE FOR
CONTROL OF THE SENATE.
MONTANA DEMOCRAT MAX BAUCUS
SURPRISED CAPITOL HILL TODAY BY
ANNOUNCING HE WILL NOT SEEK
REELECTION WHEN HIS TERM ENDS
NEXT YEAR.
THAT MAKES HIM THE EIGHTH
SENATOR, AND THE SIXTH DEMOCRAT,
TO STEP ASIDE THIS YEAR.
THE TWO REPUBLICANS HOLD SAFE
RED SEATS IN NEBRASKA AND
GEORGIA.
AND THREE OF THE DEMRATSOC ARE
FROM STATES PRESIDENT OBAMA
CARRIED LAST FALL.
BUT THE REST ARE TOSS-UPS THAT
MAY COST DEMOCRATS CONTROL OF
THE SENATE IN 2014.
PLUS, FOUR MORE INCUMBENT
DEMOCRATS-- FROM NORTH CAROLINA,
ARKANSAS, LOUISIANA, AND
ALASKA-- ARE CONSIDERED
VULNERABLE.
SO, CAN ONE SENATOR'S DECISION
CHANGE THE POLITICAL LANDSCAPE?
FOR THAT, WE TURN TO STUART
ROTHENBERG OF THE ROTHENBERG
POLITICAL REPORT AND AMY WALTER
OF THE COOK POLITICAL REPORT.
GOOD TO HAVE YOU BOTH HERE.
WHAT'S YOUR AR
QUESTION, NEW
> T IT CHANGES THE MAP A
LITTLE BIT.
THERE ARE FOUR SEATS RIGHT OFF
THE TOP THAT REPUBLICANS ARE
VERY OPTIMISTIC ABOUT.
TWO OPEN IN SOUTH DAKOTA AND
WEST VIRGINIA AND THEN THE TWO
DEMOCRATIC SENATORS FROM THE
SOUTH, MARY LANDRIEU IN
LOUISIANA AND MARK PRY YOUR IN
ARKANSAS.
GETTING DWLOOND IS THE
CHALLENGE.
NOT TO SAY THE REPUBLICANS WILL
WIN ANY OR ALL OF THOSE BUT THEY
HAVE A PRETTY GOOD CHANCE.
SO THE QUESTION IS CAN THEY
BROADEN THE PLAYING FIELD.
MONTANA IS AN IMPORTANT
ADDITION.
THEY NEED TO PUT THESE OTHER
SEATS-- AS YOU MENTIONED, ALASKA
NORTH CAROLINA-- INTO PLAY.
>> Ifill: AND MAX BAUCUS --
>> HE'S THE CHAIRMAN OF A VERY,
VERY IMPORTANT FINANCE COMMITTEE
AND HE'S BEEN AROUND FOR 30
YEARS.
THESE FOLKS WHO ARE RETIRING,
THEY'VE BEEN COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN,
BEEN IN CONGRESS FOR 30 OR MORE
YEARS.
THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT OPEN
SEATS IS NO PARTY WANTS TO HAVE
AN OPEN SEAT.
THEY ARE USUALLY TOUGHER TO
DEFEND.
BUT IN THE CASE OF MONTANA IT
MAY BE A BETTER SITUATION FOR
DEMOCRATS IF DEMOCRATS ARE ABLE
TO GET THE CANDIDATE THAT
THEY'RE ALL TALKING ABOUT RIGHT
NOW, BRIAN SCHWEITZER, THE
FORMER GOVERNOR TLEFT OFFICE VE.
HE IS THE QUINTESSENTIAL MONTANA
DEMOCRAT.
FILL FRILL THEY GOING AFTER HIM?
>> OH, THEY MOST CERTAINLY WILL
BE GOING AFTER HIM.
IF THEY GET -- IF SCHWEITZER IS
IN THAT POSITION, HE RUNS AS THE
GOVERNOR, NOT AS A 30-YEAR
INCUMBENT WITH A LONG VOTING
RECORD.
ESPECIALLY ON MORE CONTROVERSIAL
VOTES LIKE HEALTH CARE.
>> THAT IS A WASHINGTON FIGURE
BUT HE'S A GOOLD OLD BOY.
HE'S VERY CHARISMATIC AND VERY
MONTANA.
>> Ifill: HE KNOWS HOW TO ROCK A
BOAT AT TIMES.
>> HE DOES.
>> Ifill: IN A MORE GENERAL
SENSE, WHAT IS TIPPING OR COULD
BE TIPPING THE BALANCE?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE ARE
INDIVIDUAL REASONS.
FOR SOME OF THEM IT'S HEALTH.
JAY ROCKEFELLER IT'S AGE AND
HEALTH.
I THINK FOR MIKE JOHANN, A
REPUBLICAN FROM NEBRASKA, A
YOUNGER MAN IN HIS EARLY '60s
I'M NOT SURE THE SENATE WAS AN
IDEAL FIT FOR HIM.
BUT FOR A LOT OF THESE, AS AMY
POINTED OUT, A LOT OF THESE
MEMBERS ARE VERY SENIOR, FIVE OF
THE EIGHT ARE OVER 70.
FIVE OF THE EIGHT HAVE SERVED
FIVE TERMS OR MORE.
SO, YOU KNOW, THERE ARE CYCLES
IN AMERICAN POLITICS AND
DEMOCRATS ARE HIT REGULAR TIRPLT
IN A PARTICULARLY DIFFICULT
CLASS, NOT AN IDEAL TIME FOR
THEM.
>> AND POLITICS IS ALL ABOUT
TIMING AND REPUBLICANS ARE
HOPING THAT THE THIRD TIME IS
THE CHARM HERE.
2010, 2012, STU AND I WOULD HAVE
COME IN HERE AND SAID "BOY, THE
MAP LOOKS REALLY BAD FOR
DEMOCRATS, THEY COULD LOSE
CONTROL OF THE SENATE."
AND THEN THOSE YEARS UNFOLDED
AND 2010 WAS THE YEAR OF THE TEA
PARTY BUT IT WAS ALSO THE YEAR
WHERE REPUBLICANS NOMINATED
TERRIBLE CANDIDATES.
N STATES THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO
WIN.
TWELVE WE, OF COURSE, HAD THE
INFAMOUS TODD AKIN IN MISSOURI
AND RICHARD NEWSHOUR DOCK IN
INDIANA.
SO FIVE SEATS THAT THEY LOST.
>> Ifill: ARE THERE ANY
REPUBLICAN SEATS BEING VACATED
WHERE REPUBLICANS ARE AT A
DISADVANTAGE?
>> NOT AT A DISADVANTAGE.
I SUPPOSE -- I MEAN, THAT WAS
SCENARIO FOR DEMOCRATS TO
COMPETE IN GEORGIA.
A VERY CROWDED REPUBLICAN FIELD.
IF ONE OF THE LESS BROADLY
ACCEPTABLE REPUBLICANS LIKE
CONGRESSMAN PAUL BROWN, FOR
EXAMPLE, WERE TO BE THE NOMINEE
I THINK DEMOCRATS WOULD THINK WE
HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY.
THEY ARE RECRUITING CANDIDATES.
THEY'RE EITHER RECRUITING
CONGRESSMAN BARROW OF GEORGIA.
A DEMOCRAT IS GOING TO BE A VERY
STRONG CANDIDATE AS A MEMBER OF
THE HOUSE AND THEY'RE RECRUITING
SAM NUNNEN'S DAUGHTER.
SO DEMOCRATS ARE TRYING TO PUT A
GOOD CANDIDATE IN GEORGIA.
>> Ifill: SO DEMOCRATS ARE
HOPING THEY GET A REVISITATION
OF THE LUCK THEY HAD LAST TIME
WHICH IS THE REPUBLICANS CHOOSE
BADLY.
>> EXACTLY.
EVEN IN STATES WHERE THEY ARE ON
DEFENSE.
DEMOCRATS ARE DEFINITELY PYINLAG
DEFENSE THIS YEAR.
THEY GOT TO PLAY A LITTLE
OFFENSE IN 2012, THEY'RE NOT SO
LUCKY THIS YEAR.
2016 LOOKS GREAT FOR THEM IF
THEY WANT TO WAIT THAT LONG.
BUT THEY HAVE TO HOPE IN A PLACE
LIKE ALASKA, FOR EXAMPLE, THERE
COULD BE A COMPETITIVE PRIMARY
WHERE THE QUOTE/UNQUOTE WRONG
CANDIDATE COMES OUT SO THAT YOU
GET A SITUATION BY 2010 WHERE
THE WEAKER CANDIDATE WINS A
REPUBLICAN PRIMARY GIVING A
DEMOCRAT A CHANCE TO HOLD A
TOUGH SEAT.
>> Ifill: IF YOU ARE A
SECOND-TERM PRESIDENT ABOUT TO
ENTER THE LAGGING DAYS OF YOUR
POWER AND YOU ARE LOSING PEOPLE
IN YOUR PARTY IN THE SENATE,
WHAT DO YOU DO ABOUT THAT?
HOW DOES THE PRESIDENT BEGIN TO
POSITION HIMSELF SO THAT HE'S
GOING TO COMPLETE THIS
ADVANTAGE.
HE HAS ALL THESE BIG
LEGACY-MAKING DOMESTIC ISSUES
LINING UP.
>> WELL, HE HAS TO THERE'S NOT
MUCH HE CAN DON'T DO ABOUT SOME
OF THESE.
BUT FOR SO MANY RED STATE
DEMOCRATS, THIS IS THE GREAT
IRONY, WHETHER THEY'RE RUNNING
AS INCUMBENT OR FOR AN OPEN SEAT
THEY'LL SPEND THEIR ENTIRE
CAMPAIGN RUNNING AWAY FROM THE
SPOT YOU KNOW THEY'D LIKE IN HIM
IS TO NOT TALK TO THEM.
TO NOT MAKE THEIR LIVES THAT
MUCH HARDER.
CERTAINLY GUN VOTE WAS ONE VOTE
MANY DID NOT WANT TO HAVE TO
TAKE AND THEY'RE HOPING THERE
WON'T BE THAT MANY MORE ON THE
DOCKET.
>> Ifill: IS THIS JUST MIDTERM
POLITICS AS USUAL OR THIS AN
UNUSUALLY HIGH LEVEL OF
DEFECTION?
>> WELL, WE HAVE HAD A NUMBER OF
RETIREMENTS IN THE PAST FEW
CYCLES SO THIS IS THIS ISN'T
THAT MUCH OUT OF THE ORDINARY.
MY INITIAL REACTION WAS THAT IT
WAS AND THEN I WENT BACK AND
LOOKED AND IT IS.
BUT IT'S STILL IMPORTANT AND
THIS GETS TO THE HEART OF YOUR
POINT.
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE SENATE IN
2014 STARTS TO REALLY KICK IN IN
TERMS OF LEGISLATIVE POLITICS IN
THE SENATE AT THE END OF THIS
YEAR AND THEN CERTAINLY NEXT
YEAR.
IF THE REPUBLICANS THINK "WE'RE
GOING TO PICK UP FOUR, FIVE,
MAYBE SIX SENATE SEATS WE JUST
HAVE TO HANG IN THERE, HANG
TOUGH, NOT GIVE THE PRESIDENT
ANY VICTORIES AND THEN HE'S
GOING TO HAVE TO DEAL WITH US
AFTER THE SENATE THAT IS GOING
TO CHANGE THE DYNAMIC AND TO THE
EXTENT TO WHICH REPUBLICANS ARE
AT ALL COOPERATIVE.
IF SIX MONTHS FROM NOW THEY'RE
FIGURING THEY'RE GOING TO GAIN
SEATS, THEY'LL BE LESS
COOPERATIVE.
>> Ifill: ISN'T THERE SOMETHING
GOOD TO BE SAID ABOUT FRESH
BLOOD.
WE KEEP SAYING PEOPLE STAY IN
WASHINGTON TOO LONG.
>> WE EACH BEEN SAYING THAT FOR
A WHILE AND THERE'S BEEN TALK
ABOUT TERM LIMITS BEING GOOD TO
FLUSH THINGS OUT.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE SENATE IN
2015, AT LEAST 49 MEMBERS OF THE
SENATE WOULD HAVE BEEN ELECTED
SINCE 2008.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE HOUSE, 40% OF
THE HOUSE HAS BEEN ELECTED SINCE
2010.
THERE'S BEEN AN INCREDIT AMOUNT
OF TURNOVER AND WHAT IT HAS DONE
IS POLARIZE IT HAD CONGRESS MORE
RATHER THAN BRINGING IT TOOGT.
>> Ifill: OH, JOY.
WITH THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, FROM INDIA,
WORRIES ABOUT THE AGE-OLD BIAS
FAVORING MALE CHILDREN.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO UPDATES A STORY HE
DID A DOZEN YEARS AGO ABOUT THE
SKEWED SEX RATIO OF CHILDREN
BORN IN INDIA.
IT'S ANOTHER IN OUR AGENTS OF
CHANGE SERIES.
>> Reporter: FOR MONTHS, THIS
22-YEAR-OLD MOTHER OF THREE HAS
BEEN COMING TO THIS CRISIS
COUNSELING CENTER IN A LOWER
MIDDLE-CLASS NEIGHBORHOOD OF
DELHI.
PUJA IS TRYING TO KEEP HER
FAMILY TOGETHER.
HER HUSBAND AND IN LAWS HAVE
TRIED TO THROW HER OUT.
THEIR PROBLEM?
ALL THREE CHILDREN ARE GIRLS.
>>.
>> ( translated ): THE FAMILY
SAYS THEY NEED SONS TO CARRY ON
THEIR NAME AND SINCE I HAVE ONLY
THREE DAUGHTERS THEY TRIED TO
TRICK ME INTO SIGNING DIVORCE
PAPERS SO THAT THEIR SON COULD
MARRY AGAIN.
THAT LED TO SOME VIOLENCE WHEN I
REFUSED AND I HAD TO RUN AWAY TO
MY MOTHER'S HOUSE FOR SAFETY.
>> Reporter: THE PREFERENCE FOR
BOYS GOES BACK MILLENNIA.
BOYS PERFORMED THE LAST RITES AT
THEIR PARENTS' FUNERAL, THEY
KAYRY THE FAMILY NAME AND WHEN
THEY MARRY THEY BRING A DOWRY
INTO THE FAMILY.
DOWRIES WERE OUTLAWED 50 YEARS
AGO BUT THEY'RE PERVASIVE AND
MISTAKENLY BELIEVED TO HAVE
ROOTS IN HINDU SCRIPTURES SAYS
THE DELHI BASED CENTER FOR
SOCIAL RESEARCH.
>> THIS WAS NEVER A PRACTICE
ANYWHERE PRESCRIBED.
I THINK IT WAS SAID WHEN THE
PRINCESS GOES SHE MUST CARRY A
NUMBER OF HORSES BECAUSE SHE'S
USED TO A CERTAIN LEVEL OF
COMFORT.
SO IT IS THE DUTY OF THE KING
TOP ENSURE THE DAUGHTER IS GIVEN
THAT.
AND THAT GETS DISTORTED NOW.
EVEN THE POOREST OF THE POOR WHO
CAN'T AFFORD TWO SQUARE MEALS A
DAY WILL ALSO HAVE TO BUY THINGS
FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: IN A RAPIDLY
GROWING ECONOMY, DAUGHTERS HAVE
BECOME AN INCREASING FINANCIAL
LIABILITY FOR THEIR FAMILIES
SAYS THIS SOCIOLOGIST.
>> THAT DON'T WANT TO PAY
DOWRIES, THEY WANT TO RECEIVE
DOWRIES.
THEY WANT TO GIVE MORE EDUCATION
TO THE BOYS THAN TO THE GIRLS
BECAUSE FOR THEM THE BOYS ARE
STILL MORE IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: AND THE CENSUS
SHOWS INDIANS ARE ACTING ON THAT
BIAS.
FOR EVERY 1,000 MALE INFANTS
BORN, THERE ARE JUST 914
FEMALES.
IN SOME REGIONS, FAR FEWER.
IN NATURE, THOSE NUMBERS ARE
ABOUT EQUAL.
>> THE GAP BEGAN TO WIDEEN IN
THE '90s WITH NEW ULTRASOUND
MACHINES THAT MADE IT EASY TO
LEARN THE FETUS' SEX.
THE SCAN LED TO THE TERMINATION
OF MILLIONS OF FEMALE
PREGNANCIES.
IN DELHI, THE CENTER FOR SOCIAL
RESEARCH HAS ORGANIZED WOMEN
INTO NEIGHBORHOOD GROUPS TRYING
TO SHIFT THE INGRAINED GENDER
BIAS, EVEN INVOKING HINDUISM'S
GODDESS OF PROSPERITY.
>> ( translated ): WE MUST BEGIN
TO WELCOME GIRL BABIES INTO OUR
HOMES, LIKE THE GODDESS LACK SHI
HAS COME INTO OUR HOME.
LACK SMI.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE ALSO AWARE
OF THE LAW THAT'S BECOME KNOWN
BY ITS ENGLISH ACRONYM.
THAT'S THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND
PRENATAL TECHNOLOGY ACT,
ABORTION IS LEGAL IN INDIA BUT
THE ACT MAKES IT ILLEGAL WHEN
DONE FOR SEX SELECTION.
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T EVEN
KNOW THAT WE HAVE A VERY STRONG
LAW.
IF YOU, A, GO FOR SEX SELECTION
AND ALSO THE DOCTOR, THE CLINIC,
THE RADIOLOGISTNUP TO SEVEN YEA.
IF THEY'RE CAUGHT DOING IT.
IN THE MINDS OF PEOPLE THAT GO
FOR SEX SELECTION.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER, ABSENT
EXTENSIVE SURVEILLANCE AND STING
OPERATIONS-- AND THEY HAVE BEEN
ABSENT-- IT'S DIFFICULT TO
POLICE SOMETHING THAT HAPPENS IN
THE PRIVACY OF A DOCTOR'S
OFFICE.
AS ONE OBSTETRICIAN TOLD ME IN A
NEWSHOUR REPORT ON THE SAME
SUBJECT THAT I PRODUCED 12 YEARS
AGO.
THIS DOCTOR CANDIDLY ADMITTED HE
PERFORMS SEX-SELECTED ABORTIONS
ROUTINELY.
SO YOU FREELY ADMIT THAT YOU DO
BASICALLY CONTRAVENE THE LAW.
>> YES, MOST OF US DO, I WOULD
SAY.
I WON'T DENY THAT.
>> Reporter: DO YOU FACE ANY
LEGAL --
>> JUST WHAT I SAID.
THERE'S NOTHING ON PAPER.
WHO CAN ASK YOU?
>> Reporter: SO DESPITE THE
EFFORTS OF ACTIVISTS IN THE TWO
DECADES SINCE IT WAS OUTLAWED
ONLY 46 SEX SELECTION CASES HAVE
BEEN BROUGHT AGAINST MEDICAL
PRACTITIONERS BUT JUST ONE-- ONE
SINGLE CONVICTION.
MEANWHILE, CENSUS FIGURES SHOW
THE PRACTICE HAS BECOME EVEN
MORE PREVALENT.
TWO DECADES AGO IT WAS MAYBE I
WILL IN THE NORTHERN FARM STATES
WHOSE GREEN REVOLUTION HAD MOVED
A LOT OF FARMERS INTO THE
MIDDLE-CLASS.
TODAY THAT MIDDLE-CLASS AND
LOPSIDED GENDER RATIO HAVE
SPREAD WIDELY.
>> PLACES LIKE UTTAR PRED DESH
ARE BECOMING MORE PROSPEROUS
WHERE THERE WILL BE GREATER
AVAILABILITY OF TECHNOLOGY AND
MORE INCOMES IN THE HANDS OF
FAMILIES, THEY WILL TEND TO
SHAPE THE FAMILY AND SEX SELECT.
>> Reporter: HERE'S A HUGE
IRONY: AS THESE AREAS BECOME
MORE AFFLUENT, FERTILITY RATES--
THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN BORN PER
WOMAN-- ARE DECLINING.
THAT'S GOOD NEWS, ESPECIALLY IN
SOME OF INDIA'S MOST DENSELY
POPULATED STATES.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO GENDER
BALANCE IT'S NOT GOOD NEWS.
>> YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU WANT A
SMALLER FAMILY THEN THE SQUEEZE
IS ON THE GIRLS BECAUSE,
INTERESTINGLY, SUPPOSE YOU'RE
MOVING A FAMILY OF FOUR TO THREE
THEN YOU WANT TWO BOYS AND ONE
GIRL.
SO IF A LOT OF FAMILIES IN
POPULOUS STATES WANT TWO BOYS
AND ONE GIRL THAN OBVIOUSLY
THERE'S GOING TO BE A GREAT
EXCESS OF BOYS.
>> Reporter: SHE'S SEEING THE
CONSEQUENCES SHE SAYS ARE
ALREADY BECOMING VISIBLE IN THE
NORTHERN FARM STATES.
A SHORTAGE OF BRIDES IS FORCING
MEN INTO MARRIAGE OUTSIDE THEIR
COMMUNITIES.
VERY AWKWARD IN A
TRADITION-BOUND SOCIETY.
>> MEN IN THESE STATES HAVE BEEN
IMPORTING BRIDES FROM, LET'S
SAY, THE EAST OF INDIA, THE
SOUTH OF INDIA.
THEY'RE SORT OF GOING SHOPPING
FOR BRIDES WHEREVER THEY CAN.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME TIME,
SHE SEES A SLIGHT IMPROVEMENT IN
THE GENDER RATIO IN THE STATES
THAT SAW SKEWED ONES EARLY ON.
SHE ATTRIBUTES THIS TO GROWING
AFFLUENCE.
>> ONCE PEOPLE REACH THE HIGHER
RUNGS OF THE MIDDLE-CLASS WHEN
THEY GO ON TO A STABLE
MIDDLE-CLASS, THEY DON'T SEX
SELECT.
THEN THEY TEND TO VIEW GIRLS AND
BOYS AS BEING OF EQUAL VALUE SO
THEY DON'T REALLY CARE WHETHER
THEY HAVE TWO GIRLS, WHETHER
THEY HAVE ONE GIRL; ONE BOY,
ETC.
>> Reporter: SHE ADMITS IT WILL
TAKE MANY YEARS AND VAST NUMBERS
MAKING IT INTO THE STABLE
MIDDLE-CLASS TO CORRECT GENDER
RATIO.
THE CENTER FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH'S
KUMARI HAS ALSO SEEN ONE
DEVELOPMENT.
MORE GIRLS ARE GOING TO SCHOOL.
>> INDIA'S FULL OF
CONTRADICTIONS.
ON THE ONE SIDE YOU SEE WOMEN IN
THE VILLAGES STILL VERY
DISEMPOWERED BUT ON THE OTHER
SIDE THERE'S A BRIGHTER PICTURE.
WE HAVE LARGEST NUMBER OF
DOCTORS, LAWYERS, PROFESSIONALS,
OUR EDUCATION LEVEL IS GOING UP
FOR THE GIRLS.
WOMEN ARE FILLING THE RANKS IN A
VERY MAJOR WAY.
>> Reporter: THIS COUNSELING
CENTER CLIENT SAYS SHE WANTS AN
EDUCATION FOR HER DAUGHTERS,
THAT'S WHY SHE'S PURSUING THE
UPHILL BATTLE TO STAY MARRIED.
>> ( translated ): WOMEN ARE
PROGRESSING MORE IN SOCIETY AND
I NEED THE SUPPORT OF THEIR
FATHER SO THAT THEY CAN GROW UP
IN A PROPER FAMILY, SO THAT THEY
CAN GET A GOOD EDUCATION, SO
THAT THEY CAN GROW UP AND HAVE
GOOD MARRIAGES.
>> Reporter: THE BEST DOWRY FOR
A YOUNG BRIDE SHE AND MANY
OTHERS SAY IS AN EDUCATION.
THE ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER 11
SPARKED A REVOLUTION OF SORTS AT
>> Woodruff: A VERSION OF FRED'S
STORY AIRED ON THE PBS PROGRAM
"RELIGION AND ETHICS
NEWSWEEKLY."
HIS REPORTING IS A PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE UNDERTOLD STORIES
PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT, A NEW
BOOK ABOUT A MAJOR CHANGE IN THE
WAY AMERICA FIGHTS.
THE ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER 11
SPARKED A REVOLUTION OF SORTS AT
THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,
TRANSFORMING IT FROM AN
OPERATION FOCUSED ON STEALING
SECRETS TO SOMETHING CLOSER TO A
PARAMILITARY ORGANIZATION
FOCUSED ON HUNTING DOWN AND
KILLING TERRORISTS.
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HAS
EVOLVED AS WELL, BEEFING UP ITS
GLOBAL INTELLIGENCE GATHERING
CAPABILITIES, AND AT TIMES
CONDUCTING MISSIONS THAT WERE
PREVIOUSLY DONE BY THE SPIES OF
THE C.I.A.
"NEW YORK TIMES" NATIONAL
SECURITY CORRESPONDENT MARK
MAZZETTI TRACKS ALL THIS IN "THE
WAY OF THE KNIFE: THE C.I.A., A
SECRET ARMY, AND A WAR AT THE
END OF THE EARTH."
MARGARET WARNER SAT DOWN WITH
HIM RECENTLY, AND BEGAN BY
ASKING WHEN IT FIRST BECAME
APPARENT THE LINE BETWEEN SPIES
AND SOLDIERS HAD BLURRED.
>> I STARTED COVERING THE
MILITARY SHORTLY BEFORE THE
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACKS AND IN THE
MONTHS AND YEARS AFTERWARDS A
LOT OF WHAT I WAS REPORTING ON
WAS THESE EFFORTS BY RUM RUM AND
THE DEFENSE SECRETARY TO
BASICALLY GET SOLDIERS OUTSIDE
OF THE DECLARED WAR ZONE, TO
BASICALLY SEND THEM AROUND THE
WORLD.
AND THAT MEANT CHANGING NOT ONLY
THE AUTHORITIES THAT THE
PENTAGON HAD TO DO THAT BUT TO
BUILD THE BUDGETS AND BUILD THE
CAPABILITIES OF SPECIAL
OPERATIONS TROOPS.
AND RUMSFELD WAS FURIOUS AT THE
PENTAGON HE INHERITED AND WASN'T
EQUIPPED TO FIGHT THIS KIND OF
WAR.
SO HE WAS TRYING TO PUSH THEM
MORE AND MORE INTO INTELLIGENCE
GATHERING, MAN HUNTING IN SOME
NOW FAMOUS MEMOS THAT RUMSFELD
WROTE THAT SORT OF EXPRESSED HIS
CONCERN ABOUT THESE THINGS AND
WHAT WE SAW WITH THE C.I.A. WAS
WEAK AFTER 9/11.
PRESIDENT BUSH GAVE THE C.I.A.
LETHAL AUTHORITY TO CAPTURE AND
KILL AL QAEDA LEADERS WHICH IT
HADN'T HAD FOR DECADES SO THEY
BECOME MUCH MORE INTO THE
KILLING BUSINESS AND THE
MILITARY BUSINESS.
>> Warner: NOW WHEN DID THE
C.I.A. -- THEY'VE STARTED OUT
CAPTURING AND INTERROGATING
TERROR SUSPECTS IN THESE SECRET
SITES.
WHEN DID THEY SHIFT THEIR FOCUS
AND EMBRACE THE POLICY OF
TARGETING AND KILLING THEM
INSTEAD?
>> THERE'S A CRITICAL MOMENT
THAT I WRITE ABOUT IN 2004 WHEN
THE C.I.A. INSPECTOR GENERAL
WRITES A PRETTY DEVASTATING
REPORT ABOUT THE ABUSES IN THE
C.I.A. PRISON AND REALLY IT HAD
THIS EFFECT NOT ONLY WITHIN THE
AGENCY BUT IN THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION AND ULTIMATELY
CONGRESS, AS WE ALL KNOW, THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC STARTED LEARNING
THE DETAILS.
THE FIRST DRONE STRIKE IN
PAKISTAN TOOK PLACE A MONTH
AFTER THAT REPORT.
NOW, I DON'T WANT TO DRAW TOO
DIRECT A LINE AND SAY ONE
ABSOLUTELY LED TO ANOTHER BUT
THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT THIS
REPORT -- THIS INTERNAL REPORT,
LED TO HELP LEAD TO A NEW
DIRECTION FOR THE C
CAPTURING THE KILLER.
>> Warner: NOW, YOU WRITE ABOUT
THIS, BUT BRIEFLY DESCRIBE WHAT
WHAT SORT OF DEBATE WAS THERE
WITHIN EITHER THE AGENCY OR THE
ADMINISTRATION ABOUT THE
MORALITY AND LEGALITY OF USING
DRONES TO ESSENTIALLY CARRY OUT
REMOTE CONTROL ASSASSINATIONS?
>> YOU HAD A WHOLE GENERATION OF
C.I.A. OFFICERS WHO HAD COME IN
TO THE AGENCY AFTER THE 1970s
CHURCH COMMITTEE INVESTIGATION
WHICH IS MANY PEOPLE WILL
REMEMBER SORT OF AIRED ALL THE
DIRTY LAUNDRY ABOUT
ASSASSINATION ATTEMPTS, COUPE
ATTEMPTS IN THE C.I.A..
SO MANY THOUGHT THE C.I.A.
SHOULD NOT BE DOING THIS IN
TERMS OF HANDLING ARMED DRONES
SO.
THEN, OF COURSE, 9/11 HAPPENED.
PRESIDENT BUSH GIVES THE LETHAL
AUTHORITY AND THERE WERE
CONCERNS THAT PLAYED OUT BEFORE
9/11 THAT WERE QUICKLY SWEPT
ASIDE.
BUT IT DID TAKE SOME TIME FOR
THE C.I.A. REALLY TO ESCALATE
ITS KILLING OPERATION EVEN AFTER
9/11 ATTACKS.
SOME OF IT WAS BECAUSE, AS YOU
SAID, THERE WAS THIS
INTERROGATION FOCUS BUT IT WAS
ALSO THEIR INTELLIGENCE WASN'T
PARTICULARLY GOOD IN ORDER TO DO
THESE DRONE STRIKES.
THEY HAD TO BROKER SECRET DEALS
WITH THESE COUNTRIES IN ORDER TO
ALLOW THEM TO HAVE THE STRIKE
AND THEN FINALLY THE BIG MOMENT
WAS AT THE END OF THE BUSH
ADMINISTRATION PRESIDENT BUSH
DECIDES THAT HE'S GOING TO
AUTHORIZE THE C.I.A. TO DO DRONE
STRIKES IN PAKISTAN UNILATERALLY
WITHOUT EVEN TELLING THE
PAKISTANIS BECAUSE HE HAD
REACHED A POINT OF FRUSTRATION.
>> Woodruff: YOU WRITE --
>> Warner: YOU WRITE ABOUT A
NUMBER OF THE DOWNSIDES AND ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT ONES YOU
FOUND IS THAT ALL THIS FOCUS ON
TARGETING FINDING SPECIFIC
TERRORISTS TOOK THEM AWAY FROM
THE TRADITIONAL WORK IN WHICH
THEY MIGHT UNDERSTAND
DEVELOPMENTS THROUGHOUT THE
MUSLIM WORLD, LET'S SAY THE ARAB
SPRING, FOR EXAMPLE, THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES MISSED.
>> WHEN THE ARAB SPRING HAPPENED
AFTER THE INITIAL SPARK THAT
HEARING IMPAIREDED IN TUNISIA
THAT SET UP THE TUNISIAN REVOLT
YOU HAD THESE KAS CHRADING
REVOLUTIONS IN EGYPT, IN LIBYA,
AND THERE'S A LOT OF CONCERN IN
THE ADMINISTRATION THAT THE
AGENCY WAS A STEP BEHIND ALL
ALONG THE WAY.
ONE OF THE THINGS I WRITE ABOUT
IN THE BOOK IS THAT WHEN YOU'RE
DOING MAN HUNTING AND
COUNTERTERRORISM YOU'RE
NECESSARILY GOING TO BE VERY
CLOSE WITH FOREIGN SPY SERVICES.
THEY'RE GOING TO HELP YOU FIND
TERROR LEADERS OR MILITANTS SO
YOUR CLOSE WITH THE EGYPTIANS
BUT THOSE ARE THE LAST PEOPLE
WHO WILL GOING TO TELL YOU THAT
THERE'S A REVOLUTION ON ITS WAY
IN THE COUNTRY.
>> Warner: EVEN IF THEY KNOW.
>> EVEN IF THEY KNOW THEY MIGHT
NOT TELL THE C.I.A..
SO THE QUESTION WAS HOW MUCH THE
C.I.A. OR OTHER INTEL AGENCIES
DIDN'T HAVE THE FEET ON THE
GROUND TO PREDICT THESE REVOLTS
AS THEY WERE HAPPENING.
>> Warner: JOHN BRENNAN SEEMED
TO INDICATE AT HIS HEARING THAT
HE WANTED TO DIAL BACK ON THE
DRONE -- HAVING THE AGENCY AND
THE DRONE ATTACK BUSINESS.
DO YOU THINK THERE IS GOING TO
BE A SHIFT?
IF, SO WHY?
>> I THINK THAT THE PRESSURE IS
INCREASING ON PRESIDENT OBAMA TO
BRING MORE TRANSPARENCY TO THESE
OPERATIONS.
THEY REMAIN IN SECRET AND IT'S
AMAZING THAT EVEN SOME MEMBERS
OF THE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEES
WHO HAVE ACCESS TO THE HIGHEST
CLASSIFICATION INFORMATION IN
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT THEY
REALIZED THAT THEY DIDN'T HAVE
EVERYTHING AND THEY WERE PUSHING
FOR MORE INFORMATION.
SO THERE'S PRESSURE TO AT LEAST
BRING MORE TRANSPARENCY AND
BRENNAN HAS SAID THAT THERE IS
THERE ARE FUNGSZ IT IS C.I.A. IS
DOING THAT IT SHOULDN'T BE
DOING.
I THINK THIS IS GOING TO BE
SOMETHING THAT TAKES TIME NOW
THAT THE C.I.A. WOULDN'T
NECESSARILY ENTIRELY GET OUT OF
THE TARGETED KILLING BUSINESS IT
MAY GIVE UP ASPECTS OF IT.
AND THEN THE QUESTION IS WELL,
HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE THE AGENCY
TO BE MOVING BACK IN THE OTHER
DIRECTION?
IT COULD TAKE YEARS BUT THERE'S
NO QUESTION THAT THE SECRECY OF
ALL THIS IS IS SOMETHING THAT I
DON'T THINK PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION THE
GOING TO BE ABLE TO MAINTAIN FOR
VERY LONG.
>> Warner: MARK MAZZETTI, THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO CONTINUING OUR
CONVERSATION ABOUT "THE WAY OF
THE KNIFE" ONLINE.
>> THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: AS MARGARET SAID,
THERE IS MORE OF THEIR
CONVERSATION ONLINE, AND YOU CAN
FIND THAT ON THE RUNDOWN.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
AMERICA'S RETIREMENT SYSTEM AND
THE GROWING PROBLEMS IT POSES
FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF TONIGHT'S
FRONTLINE, "THE RETIREMENT
GAMBLE."
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN SMITH LOOKS
AT WHAT WAS BEHIND THE SHIFT TO
PRIVATE PLANS KNOWN AS 401(k)'s,
THE ROLE OF THE FINANCIAL
SERVICES INDUSTRY, AND WHY TOO
MANY AMERICANS HAVE TOO LITTLE
IN SAVINGS.
HERE'S AN EXCERPT ABOUT THE
PLIGHT OF ONE WORKER AND WHAT HE
IS FACING.
>> ROBERT TILTON SMITH ENTERED
THE WORK FORCE IN 2003.
HE TAUGHT FAR BIT, WORKED AT A
COFFEE SHOP AND THEN WENT TO
GRAD SCHOOL WHERE HE RAN UP
$40,000 IN STUDENT LOANS.
BUT ON THE BRIGHT SIDE, HE HAD
NO SAVINGS TO LOSE DURING THE
2008 CRASH.
WHEN HE GRADUATED WITH A MASTER
NIECE ECONOMICS HE WAS HIRED AT
A SMALL THINK TANK IN NEW YORK.
THEY HAD A 401K AND HE BEGAN TO
MAKE REGULAR CONTRIBUTIONS.
BUT EVEN IN A RELATIVELY GOOD
MARKET, HE BEGAN TO SENSE THAT
SOMETHING ELSE WAS WRONG.
>> I HAVE A 401(K), I SAVE IN
IT.
IT HASN'T SEEMED TO GO UP.
IT'S AWFUL.
I KEPT CHECKING THE STATEMENT
I'D BE LIKE "WHY DOES THIS THING
NEVER GO UP?
THIS IS WEIRD."
I MEAN, THE STOCK MARKET I KNEW
WAS UP AND DOWN BUT I WAS LIKE I
STILL SHOULD BE SEEING SOME
RETURNS.
>> Reporter: HILTON SMITH
DECIDED TO MAKE A RESEARCH
PROJECT OUT OF THE SUBJECT.
HE BEGAN BY LOOKING AT THE
INVESTMENT OPTIONS INSIDE HIS
401(K) PLAN-- 22 FUNDS IN ALL.
>> YOU KNOW, YOU'VE GOT ALL
THESE NAMES AND THE NAMES TELL
YOU NOTHING.
IT'S A BALANCE FUND.
IT'S A GROWTH FUND.
OKAY.
YES, THAT'S LINGO FOR CERTAIN
KIND OF BROAD INVESTMENT
STRATEGY BUT REALLY WHAT THE
HECK?
SO I WENT THROUGH EACH OF THE
ACTUAL FUND PROSPECTUSS, WHICH
TOOK ME AN EXORBITANT AMOUNT OF
TIME.
EACH OF THESE THINGS WERE, YOU
KNOW, 50 PAGES LONG.
THEY STILL WOULDN'T TELL YOU
WHAT THEY WERE DOING.
>> Reporter: AS HE DUG DEEPER,
HE DISCOVERED ONE FUND INVESTED
IN MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES--
THE KIND OF SECURITY THAT CAUSED
THE COLLAPSE OF THE HOUSING
MARKET.
BUT THAT'S NOT WHAT WORRIED HIM.
>> I WAS DIGGING INTO ALL THE
DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF IT AND I
KEPT COMING BACK TO FEES.
SO HERE'S THE FIRST MENTION OF
FEES, X RATIO RIGHT HERE.
WHY WOULD YOU THINK THAT X RATIO
MEANS FEES?
>> Reporter: HILTON SMITH FOUND
OVER A DOZEN DIFFERENT KIND OF
FEES INCLUDING ASSET MANAGEMENT
FEES, TRADING FEES, MARKETING
FEES, RECORDKEEPING FEES AND
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
>> FEES WHEN YOU DRAW MONEY,
FEES WHEN YOU TAKE LOANS, FEES
WHEN YOU GET MONEY WHEN YOU'RE
RETIRE WHICH HAD I DIDN'T KNOW
ABOUT.
I SPENT A MONTH GOING OH, THIS
FEE IS A SUBTYPE OF THIS FEE AND
OH, THAT COVERS THAT.
NO, THAT'S ANOTHER NAME FOR
THAT.
IT WAS VERY OPAQUE.
>> Reporter: THE AVERAGE
ACTIVELY MANAGED MUTUAL FUND
CARRIES AN ANNUAL EXPENSE OF
1.3%.
SOME FUNDS CHARGE A FEE OF 2%.
AND EVEN AS HIGH AS 5%.
>> THAT MAY NOT SEEM VERY MUCH,
RIGHT?
YOU KNOW, YOU'VE GOT $50,000 OR
$100,000 AND OKAY SO YOU LOSE
$500 OR YOU LOSE $1,000.
THAT'S WHAT YOU WOULD PAY TO A
FINANCIAL ADVISOR, RIGHT?
BUT IF YOU ADD THAT UP OVER 20
OR 30 OR 40 OR 50 YEARS IN A
401(K) PLAN, ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOU'RE WELL INTO THE SIX FIGURES
AS YOUR BALANCE GROWS.
AND THAT'S THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN RUNNING OUT OF MONEY
BEFORE YOU DIE OR HAVING A
LITTLE MONEY LEFT TO PASS ON TO
YOURARYS.
>> Ifill: RAY SUAREZ TALKED TO
FRONTLINE'S MARTIN SMITH ABOUT
HIS OWN 401(k) MISHAPS.
FIND THAT CONVERSATION ON OUR
WEB SITE.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY,
AUTHORITIES SAID THE SURVIVING
SUSPECT IN THE BOSTON BOMBINGS
HAS ADMITTED HE DID PLAY A ROLE
IN THE ATTACKS, AND THEY BELIEVE
HE AND HIS BROTHER ACTED ALONE.
THE MISSISSIPPI MAN ACCUSED OF
SENDING RICIN-TAINTED LETTERS TO
THE PRESIDENT AND A SENATOR, WAS
RELEASED.
AND WALL STREET RALLIED AFTER A
BRIEF PLUNGE WHEN A FAKE "TWEET"
REPORTED EXPLOSIONS AT THE WHITE
HOUSE.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS GAINED MORE
THAN 150 POINTS.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE WE LOOK AT
THE GUANTANAMO BAY DETENTION
CENTER BY THE NUMBERS.
HARI SREENIVASAN EXPLAINS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW BIG IS IT
THE FACILITY, AND HOW MANY
DETAINEES ARE THERE?
THOSE ARE AMONG STATISTICS WE
OFFER.
PLUS REVISIT A PHOTO ESSAY ABOUT
CONDITIO INSNSIDE WHERE MORE
THAN HALF THE PRISONERS ARE ON
HUNGER STRIKES.
AND EXPERT HEADHUNTER NICK
CORCODILOS WRITES ABOUT
TRANSITIONING CAREERS FROM THE
MILITARY TO CIVILIAN WORK.
THAT'S ON OUR MAKING SENSE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE TALK WITH KEN
FEINBERG.
HE'LL MANAGE THE $20 MILLION
FUND TO HELP BOSTON MARATHON
BOMBING VICTIMS AND THEIR
FAMILIES.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.